---
layout: post
title:  "What is happening in Chile, why could it be a worldwide example and what should a Chilean take into consideration for next October plebiscite?"
comments: true
date:   2020-09-18 17:51:00 -0300
categories: coto blog chile
lang: eng
tags: blog chile singapur plebiscito apruebo rechazo político política udi comunista marxista capitalismo neoliberalismo estudiantes
author: "Coto Augosto"
---

Chile lives a reality that I would like to express in first person to my foreign friends and especially to Chileans, on last October 16 a social movement began that got out of hand, going through moments of great confusion and ignorance regarding what was happening, and with that generating a lot of fear and damage to the country itself, then a series of events occurred that allowed us to have greater clarity regarding what was happening. However, at the beginning of 2020, the no lesser problem of the Pandemic that we share worldwide was added, and that despite being a small and apparently intelligent population (according to external visions regarding how we have built our society) we are within more infected countries. In addition to the above, this October 25, Chileans face what some intellectuals define as a change of society to a next generation or make mistakes and go back several years. Fortunately, the time of confinement made it possible to clarify what is happening and have more clarity regarding what to do.

## TL; TR

I write this article from an impartial point of view, as a Chilean detached from political or social classes. I am who you cannot call neither facho nor comunacho, my opinions are objective, based on numbers and personal experiences, however at the end of this post, and after an analysis in the proposed solutions, I express which alternative is concluded as better for Chile for the October 25th Plebiscite. This post was written on an important Chilean date as September 18th, a date that represents the beginning of something that all Chileans feel proud, our freedom.

The article has an estimated reading time of 15 minutes including arguments. Here are links to the 6 main points in which it is separated:

* <a href="#1"> Who am I and why do I allow myself to deliver some humble tips to improve topics like Education? </a>
* <a href="#2"> How to improve Education in Chile? </a>
* <a href="#3"> How to improve Pensions, Health, Justice and other main areas of concern for a State? </a>
* <a href="#4"> How to understand the Policy to make a good decision to vote in the October 25 plebiscite? </a>
* <a href="#5"> What should a Chilean bear in mind before voting? </a>
* <a href="#6"> How should a Chilean vote this October 25? </a>

## <span id = "1"> Who am I and why do I allow myself to deliver some humble tips to improve topics such as Education? </span>

I am a Chilean, born in the Atacama region, together with my mother, Rosario Cancino and my older sister for 7 years, Valeska, we composed the beginnings of what was my initial family, of humble origin and that to this day continues to harvest fruits and enjoying a quiet life through honest, balanced and dignified work that my Mother has given us as an example. Today I work in my own company focused on science and technology.

As a Chilean, today in the midst of a pandemic, I ask myself: Would a Chilean be willing to live with the repression and lack of freedom of Singapore, China or Germany? It is true that some of these countries are very beautiful and represent the face of a country that has managed to carry the country's wallet and politics in a good way, which is what ultimately solves the problems, but in terms of freedom that exists in those countries, A true Chilean would not be able to tolerate the lack of freedom for long, unless the cost is worth it and it goes with his personality and missing Chile a lot, a country that, in addition to being advanced, is free and that is what it does it better than Germany, said German friends whom I host for a few months in Santiago at the beginning of 2019.

However, there are things that the State of Chile should improve and I would like to share some ideas of what and how Chile should improve in Education, and the fundamental idea to improve the main axes of a State such as Health, Pensions and others.

### <span id = "2"> How to improve Education in Chile? </span>

In my Primary and High Schools, I was never the best in the class, nor the worst, in fact I remember that I was always in the third or fourth place in grades in the course, I liked the anonymity of not offering expectations and it never worried me. At the end of High School, at 17 years old, I received a book about the Federico Santa María Technical University (in Chile) from the High School vocational counselor, Mr. Patricio Jorquiera. It changed my life, the only thing I wanted at that time was to study at that University, I didn't know what to, but I did know where to, even though I didn't have the resources to cover my studies.

A few time before the registration for the National University Access Test began, at the time the PAA and Actual PSU, I received from the same Vocational Counselor, one of the scholarships that the Ministry of Education distributed to take the test free of payment ; Mr. Jorquiera himself also motivated me to contact the University Social Assistants to learn about the available alternatives to study. Thank you Professor Jorquiera. From there everything was in my hands.

Short story, at the beginning of the year 2000, the state of Chile covered 95% of my first degree through the Mineduc Scholarship, I received monthly about $40 USD a month as a President of the Republic Scholarship and also, from the Santa University María, a food grant 3 days a week in his valued casino, and financial help to pay the student residence (about 900 kilometers / 560 miles from home). In return, I knew that I had to pass the subjects, that is, dedicate myself to studying and not having fun. I do recognize that in my last year of my degree, when I had approved the most important signatures and I was certain that my degree was going to end very soon, I went to all the parties organized by the student federation.

Today I return the hand to the State being a taxpayer who pays its taxes pleasantly and I look for ways to pay more taxes by generating employment and thereby contributing my grain to move the economy. And above all, being a citizen who supervises the good use of fiscal resources.

Therefore, I can tell many politicians face to face that <b> It is a lie that in Chile there is no access to quality education if you do not have the means </b>. In a pragmatic way I attest that for many years, if a Chilean wants to study, he can do it and in good Universities. Different thing are the students who ask to have free education as in neighboring countries, where since it is free, many students take more than 10 years to finish their careers, bleeding the state's wallet and ignoring the consequences that this takes for the country in the medium and long term. In Chile there is also a minority of students who do not understand the social danger that comes with living off the teat of the state as a Right _in aeternum_ (for eternity).

Given that after finishing my first degree, I finished, by my means, studies at two other Universities (USACH and Universidad de Chile), I can say that I know closely the reality that exists in them. I can tell you with certainty that the Chilean is very humble in general and does not boast of the quality of Education that we have, ahead of South American countries in about 10 years thanks to the academic infrastructure that the country has, except for the difference with Uruguay which is more limited, if you do not believe me, I invite you to take a tour of some institutions such as the Beauchef Campus of the University of Chile, or the mythical University of Concepción in the South of Chile, in mining matters, the University de Atacama has worldclass profesional and scenario, not to mention the infrastructure in private universities in Chile, there are many, in the meantime I will write a list of what, in my humble opinion, should be improved in Education in Chile:

1. <b> Student representative must take a supportive role. </b> The work as Student representative would be much more noble to collectively support students who are going through some need, to achieve their studies. The functions of a Student representative cannot be allowed to be limited solely to mobilizing strikes, takings and organizing parties, even going so far as to harm their classmates by losing a full academic year in some cases (A year of his life wasted in unnecessary causes or political interest).
2. <b> Student representative who lead the Federations must maintain an approval rate of signatures within the 2 best quintiles. </b> In simple words, student representatives, who is going to represent you, must be also interested and above all, in study.
3. <b> Improve language teaching, by Obligation 3 languages ​​must be taught. </b> Chinese, because inevitably and fortunately the future is integrated with the other side of the planet; Some original language, in the case of Chile for example Mapudungun to connect society with its origins, and English, which has been and will be for a while, the international language.
4. <b> The National Accreditation Commission (CNA) must urgently correct the Accreditation requirement for a low failure rate in careers. </b> It is absurd not to understand that improving the quality of education precisely consists of delivering good professionals and for this, those who do not have the skills should be failed, then guide them to different professional areas.
5. <b> Understand as citizens that as better tax wallet, better benefits and education and more. </b> The country must be able to produce resources, prevent money from leaving the country, and above all prevent money from arriving at criminal or corrupt hands (reality of other countries in the 20th century).
6. <b> Give teachers the importance and living conditions they deserve. </b> In Chile students MUST CONTINUE WITH ONLINE CLASSES while there is a risk of contagion, with all the pain and problems that this means for some families , but as long as respect for academic authority is not regained, lost when politics met the student federations, students are a risk for the weakest population (retired) by gathering in strikes that some students still support.
7. <b> Prohibit student leaders from relating to political parties. </b> Good students in universities are concerned about performing well academically and what a job! And they cannot be concerned about what student leaders do, who, in addition to being detached from politics, must demonstrate good academic performance. Most of the students are smart enough to realize that politics is too discredited and has caused a lot of damage, how to also allow it to be 'the politician' who represents the students while they focus on studying. There are a few students who go to the University only to pursue a political career, this reality can be seen in current Chilean Deputies such as Camila Vallejo, Gabriel Boric, Giorgio Jackson, Karol Cariola, among others.

There are many indebted for education in Chile, something that should not happen, and the only solution to avoid is for the State to have better coffers ($) to distribute this wealth in education, despite this, in the last 2 decades the benefits in Education they have only improved, thanks to the fact that the Chilean economy grew constantly, except in the last government of Michelle Bachelet, where communist policies were implemented that seriously damaged the country's economy. It is not a personal opinion, the numbers say it. To give you an idea, in the middle of 2020, emblematic public universities such as the University of Santiago de Chile, among others, in a period of just 2 weeks delivered computers and internet connection to all students who did not have, while the online classes due to the Pandemic.